## Advisors

It is hard to anticipate what problems you will run into while
programming, and which concepts you will find hard to understand.
Normally, those issues would be resolved in the seminar, but this
semester, we won't have that luxury.

Instead, we will do our best to give you extended text materials and
examples, so that you can resolve as many issues as possible on your
own. Of course, that will sometimes fail: for that reason, you will
be able to «interactively» ask for «help online». Unfortunately, as
much as we would like to, we cannot provide help 24/7 – there will
instead be a few slots in which one of the teachers will be
specifically available. You can ask questions at other times, and we
will provide a ‘best effort’ service: if someone is available, they
may answer the question, but please do not rely on this. For this,
we will use the online chat available at https://lounge.fi.muni.cz –
use your faculty login and password to get in, and join the channel
(room) ##pv248 (double sharp). The schedule is as follows:

│ day │ start │  end  │            person │
├┄┄┄┄┄│┄┄┄┄┄┄┄│┄┄┄┄┄┄┄│┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┄┤
│ Tue │ 16:00 │ 18:00 │ (Lukáš Korenčik)  │
│ Tue │ 18:00 │ 20:00 │ Petr Ročkai       │
│ Thu │ 16:00 │ 18:00 │ Vladimír Štill    │
│ Fri │ 16:00 │ 18:00 │ Petr Ročkai       │

Please note that the Tuesday 16:00 slot is a backup, in case there
is too much demand in the three remaining slots. Please only use it
if you didn't manage to get a word in at other times. It will be
either cancelled or made permanent after a few weeks, depending on
traffic in the remaining slots.

The other option is of course the discussion forum in IS, where you
can ask questions, though this is not nearly as interactive, and the
delay can be considerable (please be patient).

Please also note that the online chat is meant for «programming
discussion»: if you have questions about organisation or technical
issues, use the discussion forum instead. Since exercises won't be
published until Wednesday, the first session will be held on
Thursday, 8th of October.
